

Low-throughput methods:

Physical methods

﻿Early experimental methods for RNA structure probing comprise physical methods
such as X-ray crystallography and nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy (NMR)
(Lengyel et al. 2014). Both methods take the RNA out of its cellular context,
especially so X-ray crystallography, where the ability to crystallise implies
the almost complete removal of the solvent. Even then, not all RNAs crystallise
equally well (some not at all), so that database of RNA structures derived by
X-ray crystallography has inherent biases. NMR imposes a considerable limitation
on the length of the RNAs that can be investigated. Both in vitro methods are
low-throughput in the sense that they typically investigate a single RNA at a time.
Especially NMR requires considerable human expertise to design and interpret all
experiments required to determine a RNA structure. Experiments for different RNAs
are considered on a case by case basis. These general limitations none-withstanding,
NMR and X-ray crystallography have generated a wealth of important insights on
RNA structure properties in vitro. Discrepancies between the RNA structures derived
from NMR and from X-ray crystallography experiments give an early indication that
RNA structure features are fairly context- sensitive (Higgs 2000). Based on these
early observations, differences between RNA structures in vitro and in vivo could thus be expected.


﻿Enzymatic Methods

﻿RNA structure features can also be probed using RNases. These ribonucleases correspond
to naturally occurring proteins that cleave at specific paired (i.e. ﻿double-stranded (ds))
or unpaired (i.e. single-stranded (ss)) nucleotides. Each type of RNase comes with distinct
specificities (e.g. RNAse T1 (ssG), RNAse A (ssC/U), RNAse S1 (ssRNA) and RNase V1 (dsRNA)).
Probing the same RNA with different RNases in separate experiments is a good way to independently
assess complemen- tary RNA structure features (and to also estimate the corresponding false
positive rates via consistency checks). The size of these proteins (> 10,000Da) (Ehresmann et al. 1987),
however, prevents them from easily crossing cellular membranes and from resolving smaller RNA structure
details, e.g. small bulges. Their use has thus been limited to in vitro studies so far
(Ehresmann et al. 1987; Weeks 2010; Knapp 1989; Woese et al. 1980; Aultman and Chang 1982;
Guerrier-Takada et al. 1983; Kertesz et al. 2010).




﻿When the structure ofdouble-strandedDNAwas determined in 1953,RNAalso seemed likely to base pair, even though it is single stranded. In 1956, Rich &Davies (88) solved a fiber X- ray diffraction structure for double-stranded RNA comprising the abiological polymers poly(rA) and poly(rU) that was a right-handed double helix with base pairing and stacking akin to that of double-stranded DNA. Additional insights into RNA structure were obtained in the 1960s when researchers found that single-stranded RNAcould stack through local van der Waals’ interactions.

